#JOUR 491/ALEC 397 Data visualization__Fall Semester 2013   |   Tues./Thurs. 3:30 p.m. - 4:45 p.m.__###Matt Waite, instructor```Email: mwaite3@unl.eduTwitter: @mattwaiteIM: matt.waite on Gtalk, mdwnlz on YahooPhone: (402) 472-5840 officeOffice: 318 Andersen```###Course description:Every day, more bits of our lives are being stored as data somewhere. And, at an astonishing pace, more of our communication and information transfer is done via the web. With that explosion of data and the ubiquity of the internet, communicators must have the skills to analyze and understand data to then communicate the stories hidden in the information. 
Welcome to data visualization, where you'll learn to use storytelling, analysis and visualization techniques to inform people with data. In this class, you'll learn what makes for good visualizations and how you can develop deeper understanding of a topic through a combination of words and graphics, forming a new kind of narrative on the web.
__NOTE:__ There are no prerequisites for this class, and that's intentional. I don't expect you to know anything about what we're going to cover. I do expect you to try, and most importantly, I expect you to __fail__ repeatedly before something works. In this class, failure is an important component of learning. But it's not failure in the academic sense -- it's that it doesn't work and doesn't work and doesn't work until something clicks and then it does. And that's the best feeling. Your effort will be reflected in your grade.
###Course goal:To get your hands dirty, to learn something new and turn you into a data nerd. Oh, and produce something innovative, unique and creative too.###Required texts:* The Visual Display of Quantitative Information by Edward Tufte
* The Functional Art: An introduction to information graphics and visualization by Alberto Cairo
###Other requirements:
* A GitHub account (free)
* A Google account (free)
* A code editor (I can point you to free ones)
* A sense of humor (Can't help you here)###Class opportunities:The opportunities in this class are to experiment with storytelling in a way you have never done before. Creativity and ambition will be rewarded. Copy and pasting will not.
As such, this class will require to you try a lot of things on your own. If you've never done this before, it can be a little daunting starting out. To help you, I've set up a time called [Maker Hours](http://www.makerhours.org) where you can come, hang out, learn something new and get help with it. The information is in the link, but the short version is: Most Friday afternoons, room 27, Andersen Hall. This time is open to any student wanting to learn programming, data viz, hardware hacking -- anything in the digital journalism space that can help them tell stories on the web. It's not required for you to show up at Maker Hours, but if you're struggling, stuck, frustrated or just really interested in learning more, come hang out. I promise you it's worth the time.###Grading:This is the first time this class is being taught, so the grading will be a little fluid. You’re being judged on your participation in the class and in the project, your attendance, your ability to grasp the materials and what you turn in. As the class project evolves, more specific grading criteria will evolve.###Final Project
The skills and the ideas we're going to discuss in this class are all building toward a final project where you will tell a story with data. The absolute minimum requirements of this final project are: 

* Tell a story with data using visual and narrative techniques discussed in the class.
* This story must be on the web.
* This story must used D3.js
* This story must have multiple data sources.

You will be graded on:

* The story
* The techniques you use
* The sophistication of the visualizations
* The creativity you show
* The effort you put in, evidenced by scrum participation, GitHub code check-ins, the questions you ask, etc.
###Notes on attendance:Yes, we all get sick. Yes, things happen. I don’t want you to be sick in my class any more than you want to be sick. You’ve got no fewer than five ways to get ahold of me. If you are going to miss class, tell me before class. We’ll work it out. But you have to tell me before class for me to help you.This said: this class builds each class onto the next one. Miss a class and you are behind. We’re going to be covering a lot of new material in this class. Miss one at your own peril.###Policies, the short versionYou cheat, you fail, no exceptions. If I’m doing something that’s keeping you from learning, tell me. Tell the Dean. Tell someone, because that’s not cool. I won’t tolerate it from myself and you shouldn’t either.###Policies, longer versions###Academic integrity:Every student must adhere to the policy on academic integrity set forth in the UNL Student Code of Conduct as outlined in the UNL Bulletin. Students who plagiarize may receive a failing grade on an assignment or for an entire course and may be reported to the Student Judicial Review Board. The work a student submits in a class must be the student's own work and must be work completed for that particular class and assignment. Students wishing to build on an old project or work on a similar project in two classes must discuss this with both professors. Academic dishonesty includes:

* handing in another's work or part of another's work as your own.* turning in one of your old papers (including something you wrote in high school) for a current class.
* turning in the same or similar paper for two different classes,* using notes or other study aids or otherwise obtaining another's answers for a quiz or an examination.
Anything and everything you include in your papers that comes from another source must be attributed with proper citation. That includes ideas and opinions. Plagiarism consists of using phrases, sentences or paragraphs from any source and republishing them without alteration or attribution. The sources include, but are not limited to, books, magazines, newspapers, television or radio reports, Web sites and other students’ papers.
###Students with disabilities 
Students with disabilities are encouraged to contact the instructor for a confidential discussion of their individual needs for academic accommodation. It is the policy of the University of Nebraska-Lincoln to provide flexible and individualized accommodation to students with documented disabilities that may affect their ability to fully participate in course activities or meet course requirements. To receive accommodation services, students must be registered with the Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) office, 132 Canfield Administration, 472-3787 voice or TTY.
###Diversity
The College of Journalism and Mass Communications values diversity, in the broadest sense of the word – gender, age, race, ethnicity, nationality, income, religion, education, geographic, physical and mental ability or disability, sexual orientation. We recognize that understanding and incorporating diversity in the curriculum enables us to prepare our students for careers as professional communicators in a global society. As communicators, we understand that journalism, advertising and other forms of strategic communication must reflect society in order to be effective and reliable. We fail as journalists if we are not accurate in our written, spoken and visual reports; including diverse voices and perspectives improves our accuracy and truthfulness. In advertising, we cannot succeed if we do not understand the value of or know how to create advertising that reflects a diverse society and, thus, appeals to broader audiences.